Happy 1st Birthday, Atomic Habits! (plus 3 gifts for you…)
One year ago today, Atomic Habits was born.

The last 12 months have been a wild ride:

1.1 million copies sold worldwide
12 consecutive months on the New York Times best seller list (currently #3)
Repeated appearances on the Audible, Wall Street Journal, and USA Today bestseller lists
Over 20,000 reviews on Audible (4.8/5 stars)
Over 1,300 reviews on Amazon (4.9/5 stars)
Translated into 40+ languages (browse international editions)
35+ keynote speeches in 13 countries
…and so much more.

I'm incredibly thankful for your support. I've been given so much this year and to celebrate Atomic Habits' 1st birthday, I put together 3 special bonuses for you.

3 GIFTS FOR YOU
I. Price drop.

Now you can get my best work at a lower price. This week, Amazon dropped the price of Atomic Habits. If you’ve been thinking of grabbing a copy (for yourself or someone else), but haven’t pulled the trigger yet, then right now is a great time to do it.

You can currently get the hardcover for:

40% off in the US
33% off in the UK
24% off in Canada
International: 38% off worldwide (with free international shipping)
The audiobook is also on sale through Audible.

 

II. Special interview with Cal Newport.

Cal Newport is the author of popular business books like Deep Work, Digital Minimalism, and So Good They Can't Ignore You. Many readers have told me that Cal's work pairs nicely with Atomic Habits.

The two of us recently recorded a 1-hour discussion on topics like focus, habits, and productivity.



III. Birthday Bundle! 

To finish off this special celebration, we partnered with Baron Fig to create a “birthday bundle” featuring some of our best habit-building products.

The bundle includes:

Atomic Habits
The Clear Habit Journal (now available in two sizes!)
Habit Squire pen (voted #1 pen by New York Magazine)
It's the ultimate habit-building package and makes a beautiful birthday or holiday gift.

Click here to see the full bundle.

Finally, let me close by saying thank you and reaffirming my commitment to you and all of my readers.

Time is precious. As always, I appreciate you sharing some of your day with me by reading my work. I will do my very best to send useful and valuable ideas your way.