Streaming star Tyler “Ninja” Blevins has his sights set on Hollywood as he looks to expand beyond the medium that made him famous. Fans have been wondering what Ninja’s next move would be since Mixer imploded, leaving him without a streaming partnership for the first time in years.

Ninja found fame and fortune on Twitch, where he became one of the world’s top Fortnite streamers. Last year, he made the surprising announcement that he was moving to Microsoft’s Mixer, which had nowhere near the audience size or cultural relevance of Twitch. Ninja was criticized by some streamers for the move, but ended up making a reported $30 million for the deal. Though Ninja and some other big-name streamers like Ewok coming to Mixer increased the site’s profile, it turned out not to be enough. Mixer’s focus on recruiting streaming celebrities at the expense of its established communities evidently didn’t pan out, as Mixer folded this summer, leaving its streamers looking for new platforms.

Continue Scrolling To Keep Reading
Click the button below to start this article in quick view.

START NOW
Metro by T-Mobile
SPONSORED BY METRO BY T-MOBILE
Save now on the iPhone SE
Now at Metro, get the iPhone SE at a great price. Get what you love, love what you pay.

SEE MORE

RELATED: 
Modder Adds Ninja To Smash Bros Ultimate (And He Looks Fantastic)

Ninja has continued streaming on YouTube since Mixer’s closure, but has yet to sign a deal like the lucrative ones he had with both of the streaming sites he previously called home. That’s left some viewers curious about what he’s been up to, and it seems like the answer is looking for ways to perform outside of the familiar medium of streaming. According to a profile in The Hollywood Reporter, Ninja is now looking for work in Hollywood. Ninja told that site that he wants to be involved in “literally anything and everything Hollywood,” whether that’s taking roles onscreen or as a voice actor. He’s already appearing in a cameo in a movie called Free Guy, which is due out this December, and filmed a scene for Jumanji: The Next Level last year, which was cut from the final release.